Blog: The basics of SQL for analytics (#6636)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/sql-for-analytics.md

---
title: The basics of SQL for analytics
date: 2023-09-06
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/hog_ql.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
 - Guides
 - Explainers
---

> One of SQL’s most important use cases is analytics. There are many ways to slice, modify, and interpret analytics data. SQL provides the depth and customizability to get insights from it, answer questions, and make data-driven decisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analytics is one of SQL's most important use cases. There are many ways to slice, modify, and interpret analytics data. SQL provides the depth and customizability to get insights from it, answer questions, and make data-driven decisions.
```

This post goes over how to analyze your analytics data with SQL and recommendations for your analysis process.

## The building blocks of SQL

> SQL provides complete customization into the retrival and formatting of analytics data. Because of the limitless options for doing this, it is useful to break down the analysis process into three main blocks: your analytics data, the SQL query, and the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQL provides complete customization into the retrieval and formatting of analytics data. Because of the limitless options for doing this, it is useful to break down the analysis process into three main blocks: your analytics data, the SQL query, and the results.
```

```json
[
	{
		"properties.$current_url": "https://app.posthog.com/home",
		"count()": 300
	},
	{
		"properties.$current_url": "https://app.posthog.com/events",
		"count()": 200
	},
	{
		"properties.$current_url": "https://app.posthog.com/insights/new",
		"count()": 100
	},
	//...more values
]
```

Most analytics platforms transform the data from the result into a visual such as a table, formatted page, or graph. This enables further analysis.

![SQL insight](../images/blog/sql-for-analytics/sql.png)

## Why use SQL for analytics?

There are two main reasons to use SQL for analytics: **customizability** and **availability**

First, SQL enables you to retrieve and format data in any way you like. You aren’t constrained by the tools and visualizations an analytics platform provides to you. This enables you to fully customize your query and results to your goals.

The options analytics platform provide are a subset of all possible queries since they likely use SQL to calculate and power those options. Using SQL yourself provides access to all possible SQL queries, data, and formatting. 

![All possible SQL queries](../images/blog/sql-for-analytics/possible.png)

> Although analytics platforms try to cover as many types of analysis and data as possible, they can’t do everything. Many types of queries aren’t possible to template. This is because the format of data for everyone’s analytics is different. For example, the your filters might be too complex or your data might be in a format visualizations can’t handle. With SQL knowledge, you can create queries using your own data format and get results relevant to you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although analytics platforms try to cover as many types of analysis and data as possible, they can’t do everything. Many types of queries aren’t possible to template. This is because the format of data for everyone’s analytics is different. For example, your filters might be too complex or your data might be in a format visualizations can’t handle. With SQL knowledge, you can create queries using your own data format and get results relevant to you.
```

---
title: The basics of SQL for analytics
date: 2023-08-31
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/happy-hog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
 - Guides
 - Explainers
---

> SQL is a programming language to help you interact with data. One of SQL’s most important use cases is analytics. In analytics, there are many types of data and ways to slice that data. SQL provides the depth and customizability to get insights from it, answer questions, and make data-driven decisions.

Reviewer 2: I dont think we need the "SQL is a programming language to help you interact with data". It's quite off putting If Im honest. As an engineer, its common knowledge what it is, and reading that line makes me feel that either this blog is not for engineers, or is written for SEO (and not to inform)

```suggestion
One of SQL’s most common use cases is analytics. There are many way to slice and interpret your analytics data. SQL provides the depth and customizability to get insights from it, answer questions, and make data-driven decisions.
```

This post goes over what SQL is, how to analyze your analytics data with SQL, and recommendations for your analysis process.

> ## What is SQL?

Reviewer 2: Same comment re above and SQL being common knowledge for engineers. I dont think we should include this section

Author: removed

---
title: The basics of SQL for analytics
date: 2023-09-04
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/hog_ql.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
 - Guides
 - Explainers
---

One of SQL’s most important use cases is analytics. There are many ways to slice, modify, and interpret analytics data. SQL provides the depth and customizability to get insights from it, answer questions, and make data-driven decisions.

This post goes over how to analyze your analytics data with SQL and recommendations for your analysis process.

> ## What is SQL?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Why use SQL for analytics?
```

Author: Oops, I meant to just delete this section, I added the parts to before and after

Using SQL for analytics provides full access to your data and complete customization over what data you retrieve and how it’s formatted. SQL has many commands and functions to help you filter, aggregate, and modify your data for your needs.

## The building blocks of SQL

SQL provides complete customization into the retrival and formatting of analytics data. Because of the limitless options for doing this, it is useful to break down the analysis process into three main blocks: your analytics data, the SQL query, and the results.

![Building blocks](../images/blog/sql-for-analytics/blocks.png)

### 1. Your data

> Interacting with data is the reason SQL exists. Data is generally stored in a table in a database, which is an organized collection of data, like a rigid spreadsheet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data is generally stored in a table in a database, which is an organized collection of rows, like a rigid spreadsheet.
```

The important part of data in relation to SQL is the structure, types, and names. Knowing this enables you to retrieve the right data for your analysis. It is also useful to know how your app captures and set values, so you can tie data to real usage.

> For example, in PostHog, you query a large number of events representing user behavior with many columns (aka properties), and rely heavily on aggregation. For a social media site, you might have more types of data like users and posts, with smaller numbers and columns, and want more details on individual entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, in PostHog, you query a large number of events representing user behavior with many columns (a.k.a properties), and rely heavily on aggregation. For a social media site, you might have more types of data like users and posts, with smaller numbers and columns, and want more details on individual entries.
```
